It's my privilege to interview a three-former traveling all this year's, and what we hope
to accomplish in this interview can really be summarized here in Proverbs chapter 27 and
verse 17.
Follow as I read it, Proverbs 27 verse 17.
It says, as iron sharpens iron, so one man sharpens his friend.
So it's true you can take a file that's made of iron and use it to sharpen a blade that's
also made of iron.
And so the Proverbs says, so it is, a man can sharpen his friend.
If you notice the footnote, it literally says, can sharpen the face of his friend.
Now what does that mean?
Well the Hebrew word for face actually includes the term countenance.
And so the experience of one man can sharpen the spiritual countenance of another.
And that's what we hope to accomplish here.
These brothers have decades of experience in the circuit and district work.
And so listen to the trials and challenges that they had to face, how they threw their
burdens upon Jehovah and especially how he sustained them.
And as you do so, it will help you to fortify your own desire and determination to stick
with your assignment and it will help sustain you through trials that you too will face.
Now let's get familiar with these brothers.
I would like to introduce them first of all, Brother Jerry Murray, Brother Felice Episcopo
and Brother Rodney Thompson.
Now brothers we'd like to know a little bit about you, Brother Murray, could you tell
us some of your background?
When my mother started studying in 1946, I got baptized myself in 1954, started pioneering
in 1960.
My wife and I were invited to the 41st class of Gilean in 1965 and we were assigned to
what was then called British Guiana and later Guyana.
And we were there for about five and a half years.
I had some health problems.
We were reassigned to a special pioneer assignment in Grenada, Mississippi.
And we were there about two years and then in 1973, I started back in the traveling
work.
Very good, until recently, until September when we were transferred to special pioneering.
Brother Episcopo, what about some of your background?
We were grateful the day that an anointed witness of Jehovah knocked on our door in Summit
New Jersey.
And my mother came into the truth in 1945 and made us study, thankfully.
And so I was baptized in 1950, pioneering in 1953 and had the privilege of attending Gilean,
the 26th class in 1955.
From there, after Bolivia, 1956, the circuit worked in Argentina, 59, the circuit in District
work.
And then 1964, we had a change of assignment.
We started to raise a family, had to come back to the United States.
Each decade proved a different challenge.
50s, missionary service, 60s, parenthood, 70s, we served with the need was greater in Spain
with our two boys, 80s, RBC, and then international construction.
In 90s and 2000s, traveling work and teaching.
And now in 2015, special pioneer service.
A very good, rich history.
What about you, Brother Thompson?
I was five years old when my dad learned the truth.
And I got baptized when I was 12 years old in 1953.
And in 1959, upon graduation from high school, I started as a regular pioneer.
In 1962, I was called into Bethel's service, milestone in my life.
And served there for four years.
And then upon leaving to get married, I was interested in the traveling work.
And I was told, go out, special pioneer for about six months, and they said, we'll see.
So we special pioneered a year and a half.
And we were invited in the circuit work in 1968.
And I've had the privilege of serving in the circuit work, in the district work,
ministerial training school.
And the last year, 46th year, as a field instructor.
And then September 1, this year, we were assigned to the special pioneer work.
Well, all of you very rich, theocratic history.
In fact, I combined over 150 years of full time service.
Quite commendable.
Now, we would like to hear some challenges or trials that you've faced throughout those years.
Brother Murray, could you start for us?
It's interesting in the work we had a lot of travel.
We've always had a lot of travel, of course.
That's why it's called traveling work.
And in South America and Guyana, we would sometimes travel for weeks and never ride in a car.
We'd ride by plane, a boat or some other way.
As far as accommodations, they were very humble in Guyana.
They were also very humble here in this country at times, but also very luxurious at times.
But there's something that both places had in common.
The brothers always provided us the best they had, the best they could.
And it's interesting.
Sister Murray and I spent over half of our career in the traveling work in homes.
And some of our strongest, most enduring relationships were built with people
that we stayed with in their homes over the years.
And quite frankly, I strongly recommend that as a way to really strengthen your relationship with the brothers.
Now, you're telling me another challenge you faced last minute assignments from the branch.
As an example, last year, on a Thursday, the first week in the service year,
I got a call early in the morning.
I mean, before seven, from the branch asking me if I could go to Wisconsin to fill in for a district overseer.
And that was on Thursday.
I said, when do you want me to go?
They said, I want you to go tomorrow for the weekend.
I didn't have the talks up.
And there were four talks I had to get up.
So I did what seemed to be the easiest thing.
I called some traveling brother friends and said,
similar outlines, it'll help me get my talks up.
They did.
And I think that's the benefit of having a strong relationship with your fellow traveling brothers.
Help me get your talks up.
Absolutely.
Very good. Thank you.
Brother Piscopo, some challenges that you faced.
And believe it, when I entered the circuit work in November of 1956,
the main mode of travel was on trucks.
And the whole country, which is two and a half times the size of California, was my circuit.
We only had five congregations in the whole country, the rest were isolated groups.
And I had the privilege of introducing the truth into a number of villages.
There were challenges, but I was young and strong.
Our great challenge came in 1964 when we had to leave our precious assignment and start parenting.
And I must admit that I wasted about a year feeling sorry for myself.
Until I started to hear my own negativity.
And with Jehovah's help, I said, get on with it.
There's life after children.
And sure enough, we worked and pursued the goal of getting back into this.
And in 1986, after our boys were raised, we were ready to get back into this.
We were able to get back into the special full-time service.
Beautiful.
Brother Thompson, some of your trials and challenges?
I'd like to relate this experience when waiting for an assignment upon leaving Bethel.
And my wife said, there are two places I don't want to go because of the social issues.
Mississippi and Alabama.
Well, Alabama was the first assignment.
And Mississippi was the third assignment.
And we loved it because Jehovah's molded us and trained us.
It was a beautiful experience that helped us to be prepared for the work he had assigned for us to do.
And on a list of challenges, I would say dealing without aging parents is one.
And also health concern on my part.
In the case of my mother-in-law, it proved to be a time of great anxiety for Vernees
since she couldn't be there to give her assistance.
Although she had a brother and two sisters that looked after her.
And in my case, my brothers and sisters, I'm the oldest of eight.
They were very supportive to me in my work.
And if there was a crisis with my parents, I was the last to know about it.
They resolved things and then they would inform me.
And I appreciated that so much.
With my concern as health, it was, I guess about eight and nine years ago, I was diagnosed with prostate cancer.
And so the organization was very supportive.
I was wondering, worried about the expense of it, how it would be cared for.
And so they let me decide a certain treatment, a robotic surgery that happened in Alabama.
And not a worry at all.
So I never lost any sleep or concern over it.
And I appreciate to this day the support the branch office provided.
Good. Thank you, brothers, for your expression.
Obviously, you've, in your wives, have dealt with various trials.
Maybe you can explain to us, how have you thrown your burdens upon Jehovah?
And how has he supported you through these times?
Brother Murray?
Well, in 1996, I began to get very sick and doctors couldn't figure out why.
It continued on into the spring of 1997.
I was working with a, my district was here, brother Samuel, heard.
And I was so sick that I'd work one door, go lay down, go work another door.
Finally, brother heard, told me he thought I was crazy to keep on trying.
And he pushed me into calling health care.
And a rainbows were made for me to go to Cleveland Clinic for diagnosis.
Turns out I had scleroderma.
And it was a very bad case of scleroderma, which is an autoimmune disease.
Then we didn't, Sister Murray and I had always believed that we would be young
when the paradise came. So we hadn't set much aside materially.
And when I think about it now, I'm really not sure, I know what happened,
but I'm not really sure how it happened.
That anything we needed, we always had.
We had the special pine year allowance which covered the utilities and the apartment rental,
but we always had about a $400 a month shortfall.
Brothers would write notes, they'd write get-well cards, and there'd be $10, $15 in it.
We always had exactly what we needed.
The only explanation I can think of is that your Hover made sure that we were taking care of,
and of course, the branch played a major role in that, too.
Brother Piscopo?
The second round that started in 1986 in the Special Full-Time Service,
the challenge has been taking care of older family members.
And at times it became so intense that I thought we would have to give up our special privilege,
but we received help from brothers like Brother Firdida, who said,
you can work it out. They've taken care of several older people.
And with Jehovah's help, in a lot of prayer, we've been able to do it and provide to this day,
and one of the complexities of our rotating into special pine year services we have to provide for
four, not just for two. And I also am now facing a health challenge for the first time in my life,
a cancer diagnosis. But I have the full confidence that Jehovah will see us through this challenge
as he has the others. Brother Thompson, what's helped sustain you?
One scripture that I draw a lot of encouragement from is Jeremiah chapter 29, verses 11 and 12.
And I take that scripture personally when Jehovah said, I have thoughts I'm thinking about you,
speaking to me, and thoughts of peace and night calamity, thoughts of a future, and a hope.
And he said, you will call, and you will pray, and I will listen. And I believe that fervently.
There have been questions in our lives. There have been challenges, problems that we didn't have
solutions for. We just waited and see how Jehovah would work it out, and it always worked out
favorably on our behalf. And for that we are truly grateful.
Excellent. Perhaps you three brothers could touch on what has helped you to stick with your
assignment through these many years. But Brother Thompson, you want to start?
The joy of serving. I think Brother Murray mentioned it earlier.
It's not the position, but it's the privilege of service. As he mentioned, we recall circuit servants
at one time. And when you are able to help people, and they respond, that's gratifying. In fact,
one question that we often get is, do you remember me? And most of the time we don't.
But often when the friends approach us like that, they will recount something you said,
something you did that touched them, and they benefited from. And that's very rewarding.
And that has kept us going. Brother Piscopo, how would you answer that question?
Well, the love of the work, of course, it's a very rewarding work to serve our brothers and sisters.
But the challenges of moving and everything of that nature, I have a good wife.
She was a missionary in her 20s, and she never quit being a missionary, even through child raising
all these years. And she's ready to go all the time. No complaints. The only thing she's ever
demanded is a good theocratic schedule. And brother Murray? First, the truth is, your heart is still
in the missionary work, too. Right? You know it's interesting. The brothers really nailed it.
What this work is all about is serving your brothers and servings your whole. And so the nature of
the work, when you love your whole, and you love your brothers, that's what keeps you going,
and that's what makes you want to do it, and left to do it so much.
Brother Bro, may I say eight men to what brother Piscopo said on good wife.
Good wife that is supportive, is you can't do it without them.
Very true. I know all of your wives, and that truly can be said about each of those dear sisters.
Now, each of you also have been now transitioned into a special pioneer work.
And that transition has caused some anxiety. We'd like you to maybe address your feelings,
how it worked for you, and perhaps even give some suggestions for other brothers that
will be turning 70. Brother Murray, let's start with you this time.
Well, the biggest challenge that I faced was really quite psychological.
For over 40 years, I had had a very tight schedule, arranged for me by the branch,
they were telling me where to go, when to go, what to do on a got there.
And it's interesting now, all of a sudden, all that's behind me. The last year in the
traveling work, I had two district assignments. I taught five weeks of elder schools. I was
chairman of the convention, taught two pioneer schools, served my circuit, and now that's behind me.
Like my brother said, that's the work we love very much. So it was a big adjustment.
I felt a little bit out of the loop, too, because I wasn't privy to the information
that I used to have. So I had to make some adjustments. What helped me to make the adjustment was
simply basically one sentence in the departure letter saying that the governing body made this
decision on the basis of love. And I truly believe that, because I began to realize how my
health had deteriorated. My energy level had dropped. I could do the meetings, I could give the
talks, but what I could not do well was I couldn't do a long, long day in service. And that's what the
work is all about. It's to help the brothers with the ministry preaching the good news of the kingdom.
So when I accepted that, and then it really did, it really helped me to make the adjustment.
Now, what I would say to brothers making the adjustment is you have a little time to plan,
you have a little time to think about what you're going to do. And I would certainly do that.
Think about where you want to settle. And personally, I would recommend settling
where you are known, where you have friends, maybe where you have served, if that's possible.
Also, think about why the governing body made these adjustments, and the benefits that are going
to come to the congregation. And I would even spend some time remembering or reminiscing about the
good times we've had and the joys we've had. I think Paul did that, because in his last letter,
the second Timothy, he said, I have fought to find the fight. So evidently, he was thinking
about the joys and privileges that he had in the ministry. I would do all those things, I think.
Thank you very much. Are you proud of your Piscopal?
Well, in my case, we've enjoyed all of these beautiful assignments, and it's sort of a sense of loss.
You're leaving something behind. I won't be in the loop anymore as I had been. But I feel a great
sense of the governing body, really governing. And in our case, this is a good head start,
because we're going to be governed in the new world. So my recommendation is follow the
governing of the governing body. And if it means a change in assignment, so be it. Get used to it.
This is what we're going to have. And thankfully, because when Caesar's gone, we're going to need to be
governed. Brother Thompson. And I'm thankful that I was very busy right up until the end.
I had, it was involved in a Bible school for Christian couples. Then we had the International
Convention. I did three Pioneer Service Schools, and that took me all just about all the way up
until it was time to move. So I didn't get a chance to dwell on the anxiety of a new assignment.
And then I was able to shift easily from that assignment into the special, special Pioneer
Works. That proved to be a blessing for me. And as Brother Murray said earlier, that if we
can go and serve, go and settle where we've served before, then we're going to find the friends
that are supportive. That was true. In my case, I settle in a district two districts ago. So the
friends knew me. They provided a kingdom hall apartment for me and very supportive. And that
helped us to make that transition. Could I add this point, Portwood? I just been talking about,
you also have to learn how to be in a congregation. We have been supervising as we're obviously
in congregations in circuits. Now you're another elder, part of a body. And I had to actually look
up and see how to do things that elders do, had refreshed myself. I also had to learn how to be a
good, special pioneer. And I concentrated on that. For example, for 40 years, I'd gone on other
people's studies, gone on return visits and had not too many of my own. Now I've got to try to
learn to do that and do it well. So there's a lot to keep you busy. In that same vein, even though I
made that mistake in 1964 of lamenting, this time I'm looking forward to the new things, being a
real elder in a congregation of body. And one of the things I want to do as an ex-traveling
man is to assure those brothers that I'm not there to compete with them. I really look forward
to being a member of their body of elders and taking my part about the things I've been teaching
for so many years. I look forward to having a Bible studies and I'm going to tap what the slave
has encouraged us to do. The unbelieving husbands I've had success in that before and I'm looking
forward to studying with a few of them, maybe bring them into the truth.
I mean, I had something brother, brother, and that is one of the things that my wife appreciated,
you wouldn't believe it, is having the paragraphs read in the Watchtower study on Sunday.
For decades, it's been Watchtower summaries, abbreviated Watchtower when the circuit
oversees visit and she has thoroughly enjoyed that. In fact, I was assigned since I've been where I
am now, the assignment to read the paragraphs of the Watchtower. And when I came off the platform,
one day brother asked me, what was the last time you read the Watchtower? It was a joy, I enjoyed it.
That's beautiful. Thank you. What about housing, brothers? That usually provides some anxiety.
How did that work out for you, brother? This is a big challenge because we have to accommodate
four people, not just two. And we've already done some reconnaissance and it's not easy
to start all over again after the slave has provided a roof over your head for the past 29 years.
So we are confident that Jehovah will help us. It's an unsolved problem, but we feel it will be
solved. We've got to work at it, but the blessing of Jehovah will come.
Brother Thompson, what about your situation? In my case, there was a kingdom hall apartment
that the elders made available for me and my wife. And they went in there and they repainted the
whole place and they provided all that we needed in order to get settled. And they continued to do
that week after week and supporting us in having a place to stay. That's beautiful. Brothers,
we really do want to thank you for the rich history that you've had and sharing your
expressions with us. And please be assured, we prayed Jehovah's blessings upon each of you and
your wives as you now continue in your special full-time service as a special pioneer.
It has been very refreshing. Hasn't it to hear the experiences of these brothers?
It's just like the proverb says, iron sharpens iron. And it's true that a spiritual man can help
to sharpen the face of another spiritual man. So we do appreciate the expressions of these
brothers. And as you move ahead in your spiritual life, you're going to have trials and challenges
to face. What's going to sustain you during those times? One thing we'd like to mention,
most of you will have one of these former traveling overseers in your circuit. They'll be serving
you special pioneers. Benefit from their wisdom, spend time with them, learn from them.
Another thing that'll help sustain you is to benefit from your fellow traveling overseers around you.
Sometimes you may have some issue, you need to discuss with another traveling overseer,
meet him on a Monday or make a phone call. His words of counsel or recommendations or suggestions
can be beneficial to you. Also, remember the branches here to assist you. It may be a conversation
you have with a member of the branch committee, or maybe the service desk in the service department.
Those brothers will always be there to sustain you and to help you where they can.
But most of all, please remember Jehovah will always be there to sustain you.
There's a beautiful scripture we'd like to conclude with and 1 Samuel 12 and verse 22.
Listen to what it says. For the sake of his great name, Jehovah will not abandon his people.
For Jehovah has taken it upon himself to make you his people.
So brothers, we encourage you stick to Jehovah as these brothers have.
Lean upon him. He will sustain you through all of your challenges and trials that you'll face
as a circuit overseer. And you too will receive many blessings of service as you move ahead
in your sacred service.